GeneticAlgorithm/README.md, before:

# Genetic algorithm

Genetic algorithms are commonly used to explore and optimize solutions to complex problems. In this section, I implemented a genetic algorithm inspired by three biological processes: selection, crossover, and mutation.

In our case, the goal is to evolve a cellular automaton that ends up with about 50% living cells after 100 time steps (see *CellularAutomaton* for more details). The main objective here is not to find the “perfect” rule, but rather to study how different parameters influence the algorithm’s behaviour and performance.

Since the cellular automaton used during evolution is fixed, it’s important to test each rule’s performance on randomly generated matrices


## Requirements

I used a Python3 environment to run the script. You may find all the external packages required in `requirements.txt`. Use the following command to install them if needed:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```


## Functionalities

This folder includes two main scripts and its modules:

- `genetic_algorithm.py` : first main script that creates an initial population and evolves it through generations. It returns a JSON file with the three best rules and a CSV file with the fitness score of each individual at every generation
- `generalisation.py` : Secondary main script that loads rules from a JSON file and evaluates their performance on randomly generated CA
- `encode.py` : contains two encoding functions to create rules as dictionaries, based either on the number of living cells or on the pattern of neighbouring cells
- `automaton_fitness.py` : provides the functions to create and update a cellular automaton, as well as a function to evaluate rules with a fitness score
- `selection.py` : contains four functions to select parent rules
- `crossover.py` : contains three functions to create a new rule from two parents
- `mutation.py` : contains the function to apply random mutations at a given rate


## Implementation

The main applications can be run directly from the terminal. The genetic algorithm requires the encoding type, selection, and crossover types, as well as an output name. Example command:

```bash
python genetic_algorithm.py --encode living --selection tournament --crossover 2p --output test
```

For the generalisation, the path to a JSON input file is required as well as the encoding type.

```bash
python generalisation.py --file 'Results/test.json' --encode living
```


:construction: **Work in progress**

I am currently working on the impact of the main parameters of the genetic algorithm.  
Planned additions include three extra scripts:
- Automation multiple runs with varying parameters
- Visualisation and summary of results

Commit message:

feat: Supplementary script to test and visualise effect of parameters + Results folder

GeneticAlgorithm/README.md, after:

# Genetic algorithm

Genetic algorithms are commonly used to explore and optimize solutions to complex problems. In this section, I implemented a genetic algorithm inspired by three biological processes: selection, crossover, and mutation.

In our case, the goal is to evolve a cellular automaton that ends up with about 50% living cells after 100 time steps (see *CellularAutomaton* for more details). The main objective here is not to find the “perfect” rule, but rather to study how different parameters influence the algorithm’s behaviour and performance.

Since the cellular automaton used during evolution is fixed, it’s important to test each rule’s performance on randomly generated matrices


## Requirements

I used a Python3 environment to run the script. You may find all the external packages required in `requirements.txt`. Use the following command to install them if needed:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```


## Functionalities

This folder includes two main scripts and its modules:

- `genetic_algorithm.py` : first main script that creates an initial population and evolves it through generations. It returns a JSON file with the three best rules and a CSV file with the fitness score of each individual at every generation
- `generalisation.py` : Secondary main script that loads rules from a JSON file and evaluates their performance on randomly generated CA
- `encode.py` : contains two encoding functions to create rules as dictionaries, based either on the number of living cells or on the pattern of neighbouring cells
- `automaton_fitness.py` : provides the functions to create and update a cellular automaton, as well as a function to evaluate rules with a fitness score
- `selection.py` : contains four functions to select parent rules
- `crossover.py` : contains three functions to create a new rule from two parents
- `mutation.py` : contains the function to apply random mutations at a given rate


## Implementation

The main applications can be run directly from the terminal. The genetic algorithm requires the encoding type, selection, and crossover types, as well as an output name. Example command:

```bash
python genetic_algorithm.py --encode living --selection tournament --crossover 2p --output test
```

For the generalisation, the path to a JSON input file is required as well as the encoding type.

```bash
python generalisation.py --file 'Results/test.json' --encode living
```


## Supplementary folder
Two scripts are available in this folder:
    - `experiments.py` : test the effect of one parameter on the performance of the algorithm
    - `run_analysis.py` : returns a lineplot to compare the effect of one parameter on the performance of the algorithm and a boxplot showing the average score of the best rules on random cellular automata.


## Results folder
Included in this folder are results from tests exploring how mutation rate and selection mode affect genetic algorithm performance.

Our results show that:
    - Completely random selection performs poorly compared to other selection strategies. This highlights the advantage of using a genetic algorithm to find optimal solutions, which is both faster and more effective than testing random solutions or evaluating them one by one.
    - Increasing the mutation rate tends to reduce the algorithm’s performance. A high mutation rate introduces excessive changes to the rules, which can degrade good solutions and steer the search away from optimal scores. In contrast, a low mutation rate maintains enough diversity to explore new rules without drifting too far from the best ones.
